TypeDB 3 - Specification (#7130)
typedb/typedb: docs/spec.md

A **disjunctive normal (DNF) of a pattern `PATT`** is a pattern obtained by

* First unfolding all `try` blocks,
* Then recursively applying transformations of the form 
    ```
    <PATT>; { <PATT_A> } or {<PATT_B> };
    --transforms to-->
    { <PATT>; <PATT_A>; } or { <PATT>; <PATT_B>; };
    ```

The resulting DNF of `PATT` will itself be a pattern of the form:
```
{ <BRANCH_1> } or { <BRANCH_2> } or ...
```

**Important**. The patterns `<BRANCH_i>` are _unique_ up to re-ordering them. We call them the **branches** of `PATT`.

### (Theory) Variables and bindings

Variables appear in statements. They fall in different categories, which can be recognized as follows.

* **Syntax**: variables in patterns `PATT` are `$`-prefixed labels
  * _Examples_: `$x`, `$y`, `$person`

#### **Variable categories**

* **Categories** indicate what type of concept a variable can hold. In a pattern `PATT`, any variable will belong to one of four _categories_ based on the following rules.

  * **Type variables** (**tvar**, uppercase convention in this spec)
    * Any variable used in a type position in a statement

  * **Value variables** (**vvar**, lowercase convention in this spec)

>     * Any variable which are typed with non-comparable attribute types is a value variables (**#BDD**)

Reviewer: I understood this, but it could be clearer. Is "non-comparable" previously defined?

    * Any variable assigned to the output of an non-list expression 
    * Any variable derived from the output of a function (with value output type) is a value variable

  * **List variables** (**lvar**, lowercase convention in this spec)
    * Any variable typed with a list type
    * Any variable assigned to a list expression.

  * **Instance variables** (**ivar**, lowercase convention in this spec)
    * Any remaining variable must be an instance var.

... the last three together comprise _element vars_ (**evars**). Evars are those variables that can be in the signature and return statement of a function.

> _Remark 1_. The code variable `$x` will be written as $`x`$ in math notation (without $`\$`$).

Reviewer: The dollar at the end of this line does not render: "... (without   )."

#### **Bound variables and valid patterns**

* **Bounds** ensure variables are tied to database concepts. (**#BDD**)
  * A variable is **bound** if it appears in a _bound position_ of at least one statement.
    * _Note_. Most statements bind their variables: this is why we will mainly highlight _non-bound positions_

>   * We say a variable is **bound directly in a block** if its bound in a "direct" statement of block (i.e. a statement which is not enclosed in a subblock).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * We say a variable is **bound directly in a block** if it is bound in a statement within that block, and that statement is not within a nested sub-block.
```

  * A pattern `PATT` is **valid** if ***all variables are bound***. 
    * _(Fun fact: otherwise, we may have to solve provably unsolvable problems)_

_Going forward, we always work with valid patterns_

#### **Variable modes and unambiguous patterns**

* **Modes of variables** indicate how to compute answers for variables. In a valid pattern `PATT`, a variable appear in various _modes_ based on the following rules.

  * **Retrievable variables** are variables that are bound in _some_ place that is _not_ `not`-gated (i.e. have some parent `not` block). 

  * **Negation-bound variables** are variables that are bound _only_ in places that are `not`-gated (i.e. have some parent `not` block).

  * **Optional variables** are variables that are bound directly in some `try` block, and potentially its subblocks.

* **Principles of unambiguity**. A valid pattern is **unambiguous** if it satifies the following.

  * _No [alpha-conversion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambda_calculus#%CE%B1-conversion) needed!_ No negation-bound or optional variable appears bound in sibling block in the same branch of the pattern without also being bound in a joint parent block. 

>   * _No negated try's_ We dissallow `try`'s which are `not`-gated (i.e. cannot `try` inside a `not`)..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * _No negated tries_ We dissallow `try`s which are `not`-gated (i.e. cannot `try` inside a `not`)..
```

* ✅ For ivars `$x` in `PATT`, `T($x)` is a schema type `A` such that $`r(x) :_! A`$ isa **direct typing**

#### **Answers**

* 🔶 A crow `r` is an **answer** to a pattern `PATT` if the following are satisfied:
    * **Retrievable domain**. Each variable in `r` is a retrievable variable of `PATT`
    * **Satisfaction**.`r` satisfies the pattern (as outlined in next section)
    * **Minimality**. no subset of `r` satisfies the `PATT` (in other words, `r` is _minimal_)

_Example_: Consider the pattern `$x isa Person;` (this pattern comprises a single statement). Then `($x -> p)` satisfies the pattern if `p` is an element of the type `Person` (i.e. $p : \mathsf{Person}$). The answer `($x -> p, $y -> p)` also satisfies the pattern, but it is not proper minimal.

## Pattern semantics of ...

Given a crow `r` and pattern `PATT` we say `r` ***satisfies*** `PATT` if (in addition to the typing conditions in outlined in "Pattern satisfication" above) the following conditions are met.

> _Math. notation (Replacing **var**s with concepts)_. When discussing pattern semantics, we always consider **fully variablized** statements (e.g. `$x isa $X`, `$X sub $Y`). This also determines satisfaction of **partially assigned** versions of these statements (e.g. `$x isa A`, `$X sub A`, `A sub $Y`, or `x isa $A`).

Reviewer: Unless something's changed, `x isa $A` is an invalid construction.
```suggestion
_Math. notation (Replacing **var**s with concepts)_. When discussing pattern semantics, we always consider **fully variablized** statements (e.g. `$x isa $X`, `$X sub $Y`). This also determines satisfaction of **partially assigned** versions of these statements (e.g. `$x isa A`, `$X sub A`, or `A sub $Y`).
```

### **Cases TYP_IS_PATT and LABEL_PATT**
* 🔷 `$A is $B` is satisfied if $`r(A) = r(B)`$ (this is actually covered by the later case `IS_PATT`)
* 🔷 `$A label <LABEL>` is satisfied if $`r(A)`$ has **primary label or alias** `<LABEL>`

## ... Type constraint patterns

### Cardinality

_To discuss: the usefulness of constraint patterns seems overall low, could think of a different way to retrieve full schema or at least annotations (this would be more useful than, say,having to find cardinalities by "trialing and erroring" through matching)._

#### **Case CARD_PATT**
* ✅ cannot match `@card(n..m)` (STICKY: there's just not much point to do so ... rather have normalized schema dump. discuss `@card($n..$m)`??)
<!-- 
* `A relates I @card(n..m)` is satisfied if $`r(A) : \mathbf{Rel}(r(I))`$ and schema allows $`|a|_I`$ to be any number in range `n..m`.
* `A plays B:I @card(n..m)` is satisfied if ...
* `A owns B @card(n...m)` is satisfied if ...
* `$A relates $I[] @card(n..m)` is satisfied if ...
* `$A owns $B[] @card(n...m)` is satisfied if ...
-->

### Modalities

#### **Case UNIQUE_PATT**

> * 🔶 `$A owns $B @unique` is satisfied if $`r(A) \leq A' <_! r(O_B)`$ (for $`A'`$ **not** an interface type), and schema directly contains constraint `A' owns r($B) @key`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 🔶 `$A owns $B @unique` is satisfied if $`r(A) \leq A' <_! r(O_B)`$ (for $`A'`$ **not** an interface type), and schema directly contains constraint `A' owns r($B) @unique`.
```

* 🔶 `$A owns! $B @unique` is satisfied if $`r(A) <_! r(O_B)`$, and schema directly contains constraint `r($A) owns r($B) @unique`.

#### **Case KEY_PATT**
* 🔶 `$A owns $B @key` is satisfied if $`r(A) \leq A' <_! r(O_B)`$ (for $`A'`$ **not** an interface type), and schema directly contains constraint `A' owns r($B) @key`.

* 🔶 `$A owns! $B @key` is satisfied if $`r(A) <_! r(O_B)`$, and schema directly contains constraint `r($A) owns r($B) @key`.

#### **Case SUBKEY_PATT**
* 🔶 `$A owns $B @subkey(<LABEL>)` is satisfied if $`r(A) \leq A' <_! r(O_B)`$ (for $`A'`$ **not** an interface type), and schema directly contains constraint `A' owns r($B) @subkey(<LABEL>)`.

#### **Case TYP_ABSTRACT_PATT**
* 🔶 `(kind) $B @abstract` is satisfied if schema directly contains `(kind) r($B) @abstract`.

#### **Case RELATES_ABSTRACT_PATT**
* 🔶 `$B relates $I @abstract` is satisfied if:

>     * $`r(B) \leq B'`$ and $`\diamond(B' : \mathbf{Rel}(I)`$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * $`r(B) \leq B'`$ and $`\diamond(B' : \mathbf{Rel}(I))`$
```

    * **not** $`r(B) \leq B'' \leq B'`$ such that $`\diamond(B' : \mathbf{Rel}(I)`$

> * 🔮 `$B relates! $I @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(B) : \mathbf{Rel}(I)`$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 🔮 `$B relates! $I @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(B) : \mathbf{Rel}(I))`$
```

* 🔶 `$B relates $I[] @abstract` is satisfied if:
    * $`r(B) \leq B'`$ and $`\diamond(r(B) : \mathbf{Rel}([I])`$
    * **not** $`r(B) \leq B'' \leq B'`$ such that $`B' : \mathbf{Rel}([I])`$

> * 🔮 `$B relates! $I[] @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(B) : \mathbf{Rel}([I])`$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 🔮 `$B relates! $I[] @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(B) : \mathbf{Rel}([I]))`$
```

#### **Case PLAYS_ABSTRACT_PATT**
* 🔶 `$A plays $B:$I @abstract` is satisfied if: 

>     * $`r(A) \leq A'`$ and $`\diamond(A' <_! r(I))` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * $`r(A) \leq A'`$ and $`\diamond(A' <_! r(I))`$
```

    * **not** $`r(A) \leq A'' \leq A'`$ such that $`A'' <_! r(I)`$ 

>   where $`r(B) \mathbf{Rel}(r(I))`$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  where $`r(B):\mathbf{Rel}(r(I))`$
```

> * 🔮 `$A plays! $B:$I @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(A) <_! r(I))`, where $`r(B) \mathbf{Rel}(r(I))`$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 🔮 `$A plays! $B:$I @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(A) <_! r(I))`$, where $`r(B) \mathbf{Rel}(r(I))`$
```

#### **Case OWNS_ABSTRACT_PATT**
* 🔶 `$A owns $B @abstract` is satisfied if
    * $`r(A) \leq A'`$ and $`\diamond(A' <_! O_{r(B)})`$
    * **not** $`r(A) \leq A'' \leq A'`$ such that $`A'' <_!  O_{r(B)})`$

> * 🔮 `$A owns! $B @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(A) <_! O_{r(B)})`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 🔮 `$A owns! $B @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(A) <_! O_{r(B)})`$
```

* 🔶 `$A owns $B[] @abstract` is satisfied if
    * $`r(A) \leq A'`$ and $`\diamond(A' <_! O_{r(B)[]})`$
    * **not** $`r(A) \leq A'' \leq A'`$ such that $`A'' <_!  O_{r(B)[]})`$

> * 🔮 `$A owns! $B[] @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(A) <_! O_{r(B)[]})`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 🔮 `$A owns! $B[] @abstract` is satisfied if $`\diamond(r(A) <_! O_{r(B)[]})`$
```

```
"key": [ 
  <PIPELINE>
  fetch { <FETCH> }
]
```

#### **Case FETCH_RETURN_VAL** 
* 🔶 Fetch single-value:
```
"key": ( 
  <PIPELINE>
  return <SINGLE_RET> <VAR>; 
)
```

#### **Case FETCH_REDUCE_LIST_VAL** 
* 🔶 Fetch stream as list:
```
"key": [ 
  <PIPELINE>
  reduce <AGG>, ... , <AGG>; 
]
```

#### **Case FETCH_NESTED**
* 🔶 Specify JSON sub-document:
```
"key" : { 
  <FETCH-KV-STATEMENT>;
  ...
  <FETCH-KV-STATEMENT>;
}
```

## Operators (select, distinct, sort, limit, offset, reduce)

Operators (unlike clauses) are **pure**: they do not depend on the DB (i.e. they do not read or write), they just operate directly on the stream that is input into them.

### Select
* 🔶 select syntax:
    `select $x1, $x2, ...`
     
    * input stream of rows `{ r }`
    * output stream of rows `{ p(m) }` for each `r` in the input, where `p(m)` only keeps the given variables that are among `$x1, $x2, ...`

### Deselect 
* 🔶 deselect syntax:
    `deselect $x1, $x2, ...`
     
    * input stream of rows `{ r }`
    * output stream of rows `{ p(m) }` for each `r` in the input, where `p(m)` only keeps the given variables that are **not** among `$x1, $x2, ...`

### Distinct
* 🔶 distinct syntax:

>     `deselect $x1, $x2, ...`

Reviewer 2: Shows deselect instead of distinct.

     
    * input stream of rows `{ r }`
    * output stream of rows `{ o }` for each distinct row in the input (in other words: duplicates are removed)
        * empty value is its own distinct value

### Require
* 🔮 distinct syntax:

>     `require $x1, $x2, ...`

Reviewer 2: "distinct syntax" -> "require syntax"?
